---
title: Kings
---

<p class="lead">
Kings is a luck-based card game from New Guinea. It plays similarly to a fishing
game, only there are no decisions to be made.
</p>

<!-- excerpt -->

The description below is based upon @ThreeNativeCardGames [p. 52–3].

## Play

The game is played with a standard 52-card deck. 

To begin, the four {%cards 'K' %} are removed and set aside. These cards are not
used for playing but as scoring tokens.

The dealer shuffles the remaining 48 cards and deals four cards face up to a
pool in the centre. If any of them can be paired (by rank) the dealer captures
these and deals replacements, and does this until there are no pairs in the
centre. The rest of the deck is placed face-down next to the pool to form a
stock.

Each player then takes their turn in the following way: they turn up two more
cards from the stock and add them to the pool. If there are any pairs they
capture them, and then play passes to the next player.

Once all the cards have been played (and thus captured), the player with the
most captured cards wins a {% cards 'K' %}. If there is a tie between players
then a single round of {% gameref laki %} can be played to determine who gets
the {% cards 'K' %}.

The cards (aside from the {%cards 'K'%}s) are then collected and shuffled and
the game is played again, until all the {%cards 'K'%}s have been claimed. The
player with the most {%cards 'K'%}s is the winner. Again, if there is a tie
between players then a single round of {% gameref laki %} can be played to
determine the overall winner.

## Dicussion

The shortening of the deck to 48 cards makes me wonder if this is a game derived
from a Japanese source, as there are other games played in New Guinea which do
have a known Japanese origin. A {% a hanafuda %} deck has (12×4=) 48 cards in
it, and the gameplay of Kings is remniscent of many <span lang="ja-Latn"
class="noun">Hanafuda</span> fishing games, where cards are paired to capture
them from a central pool.
