---
title: H. J. R. Murray
order: 100
---

[H. J. R.  Murray](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/H._J._R._Murray){%fn%}Son of
[James Murray](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Murray_(lexicographer)), the
first editor of the Oxford English Dictionary.{%endfn%} (1868–1955) is a very
important figure in the history of board games studies. He published two key
 works: @Murray in 1913 and @Murray2 in 1951.

<cite>A History of Chess</cite> took 13 years to complete, and Murray taught
himself German and Arabic in order to finish the book! <cite>A History of
Board-Games Other Than Chess</cite> was published when he was 83, being nearly
40 years in the making.

## Errata for <cite>…Other Than Chess</cite>

The following are my own notes on what I believe to be incorrect in the book.
They are listed in book order, with section number first; the list is
incomplete:

<strong>§3.1.6</strong> (p. 39): <strong>Tre-guti</strong> is not equivalent to
three-men’s-morris but is a capturing game; also the citation <del>Games from
the Punjab</del> should be named <ins>A Few Types of Sedentary Games prevalent
in the Punjab</ins>.

<strong>§3.3.2</strong> (p. 41): <span lang="es">alquerque de tres</span> is
listed as equivalent to three-men’s-morris; it is actually equivalent to noughts
& crosses (§3.2).

<strong>§3.3.5</strong> (p. 41): the citation of @NoticeDesÉmaux [p. 381] for
<strong lang="fr">carré chinois</strong> is incorrect (but he is following
@Fiske [p. 114]).

<strong>§3.3.11</strong> (p. 41): <strong>Tin-guti pait pait</strong> is not in
the reference cited (@Humphries), but it is in @Datta.

<strong>§3.3.13</strong> (p. 42): Hyde[@Hyde2 p. 211] writes <ins>Che-lo</ins>,
not <del>lo che</del>.

<strong>§3.5</strong> (p. 45): <del>a3, b1, c3, and b3, b6 being empty</del>
should read (something like) <ins>b1, c2, b3, and a2, b2 being empty</ins>, as
the pieces should form a cross shape with an empty middle;
<del>vangjamylna</del> should read <ins>vængjamylna</ins>; also, <i>charri</i>
or <i>saddeh</i> refer to simple mills, not the ‘running mill’ formation.

<strong>§3.5.13</strong> (p. 47): al-Fīrūzābādī shows board <ins>G</ins>, not
<del>B</del>.

<!--
<p><strong>3.5.32</strong> (p. 48): citation could be misleading there are 
two articles by Goddard, <cite r="Goddard1901" inline /> has no reference to Trique.</p>
-->

**§4.9.3** (p. 94): Murray mistakenly suggests that <span lang="ms">tjeki</span> (i.e. {%a ceki%}) is the same as the game <span lang="ms">chuki</span>.

### “Books and articles consulted”

pg. 244: All of Hem Chandra Das-Gupta’s articles have incorrect titles. Possibly they were published under different names at some point?
