---
title: Three Men’s Morris
draft: true
players: 2
---

<p class="lead">
Three Men’s Morris is an ancient {%a mill-games,mill game%} game for two
players.
</p>

<!-- excerpt -->

## Play

{%image src="../mill-games/small_merels_with_diagonals.svg" alt="" %}
The game is played on the small mill board with diagonals.
{%imageEnd%}

Each player has three pieces, in contrasting colours.

There are two ways to begin the game: either players take turns placing a piece
on one of the empty points, or the pieces are lined up on two opposite sides of
the board.

Starting the game by playing to the centre of the board is a forced win for the
first player, so usually this move is banned.[@WinningWaysV3 p. 737]

After placing all their pieces, the players then take turns moving a piece from
one point to another. The first player to get three pieces in a line (aside from
on their starting locations, if using the pre-placed opening) wins.

## History and Nomenclature

As evidenced by the many boards carved into stone walls and seats in cathedrals
and monasteries, the game was played in England over a long period — {%a
hjr-murray,Murray%}[@Murray2 p. 41] dates it from after the Norman conquest in
the 11th century, and states that it was “well established by 1300.” However,
the game seems to have declined until in the 19th century it was not well known
in England; English visitors to Ireland during this period describe it as an
Irish game.

In 19th century Ireland, it was described as ‘universally’ played by the
peasantry and named <span lang="ga">caisleáin gearr</span>{%fn%}Hyde[@Hyde p.
211] wrote this as “cashlan gherra”.{%endfn%} ‘short castle’,[@CrokerCrofton p.
171] or ‘top castle’.[@GentlemansMagazineLibrary p. 257] Other old names in the
United Kingdom come from areas such as Galloway (‘corsi-crown’)[@Gallovidian p.
142] and Cumberland (‘copped-crown’).[@Hyde p. 211]

The name Three Men’s Morris seems to be a modern invention, based on the name {%
gameref nine-mens-morris %}. In the past it was known by other names in England,
such as “Knockings In and Out”.[@NotesOnTheAbbey p.
20][@OnTheIndoorGamesOfSchoolBoys p. 321] It has also been called “Ovid’s Game”,
based on its similarity to a game that is vaguely described in Ovid’s [<cite
lang="la">Ars
Amatoria</cite>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ars_Amatoria).[@WinningWaysV3 p.
736]

Murray[@Murray2] claims that a distinct game called ‘Nine Holes’
existed, but I don’t believe that it was a separate game to Three Men’s Morris,
as all the references seem to track back to a single entry in Robert Nares’
<cite>Glossary</cite>.[@NaresGlossary p. 345]

Writing in 1694,[@Hyde p. 211] Hyde said it (or the variant where 3 pieces line
up on each side to begin with) was called “Che-Lo” in Chinese (i.e.  <span
lang="zh-Hant">直六</span> <span lang="cmn-Latn">zhí liù</span> ‘straight six’),
“Hugjurè” in Persian (probably <span lang="fa">هجوره</span> (“his majesty”?),
but he also said that each player has 6 pieces).

In other parts of the world, it is known as Tapatan in the Philippines, or <span
lang="yue-Hans-HK">六卒棋</span> (<span lang="yue-Latn-jyutping">luk6
zeot1 kei4</span> ‘six man game’) in southern
China.[@CulinPhilippine p. 648]{%fn%}Note that @Bell confuses its sources here
and claims that Hyde states that “Luk Tsut K’i” was played in the time of
Confucius.{%endfn%}

In Bengal the game has been called <span lang="bn">তাঁত ফাঁত</span> <span
lang="bn-Latn">Tant Fant</span>[@Datta, p. 167] (possibly meaning something like
‘[Loom-Schmoom](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shm-reduplication)’) or <span
lang="bn">তিন গুটি পাইত পাইত</span> (<span lang="bn-Latn">tin-guṭi pait
pait</span>, ‘getting(?) three pieces’). It is played with diagonals and
lined-up setup.

To write up: Tapatan, Picaria.

See also: Picaria in @Zaslavsky, @TicTacToe.

Also called (with diagonals) Hopscotch, in @MathematicalRecreationsMaurice [p.
290], but I think that name is better reserved for Picaria.

## To Check
* Terni Lapilli
* Three Men’s Marriage

## Variants

### Circular Three Men’s Morris

In this version the game is played on a circular board with ‘spokes’, meaning
that mills can only be made across the center point. @Zaslavsky [p. 4–5] calls
it Shisima, and says it is played in Kenya.{%fn%}The original reference for this
seems to be <cite>African Games of Strategy: A teaching manual</cite> by Louise
Crane, but I haven’t been able to view this work.{%endfn%} It has also been
published as ‘[Tri-Pin](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/111169/tri-pin)’ (Louis Marx & Co.).

See @HeimannLoop for analysis of the game.

### X-ceter-O

[X-ceter-O](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/21951/x-ceter-o) (Endless Games,
2009) — originally in German <span lang="de">X-für-O</span> (Milton Bradley,
1985) — has 6 pieces numbered #1–#6, alternating between sides. The pieces must be
placed or moved in order (and can leap to any unoccupied square), looping back
to #1 after #6 has been moved.

### King

[King](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/22452/king) (Jim Wilkinson, 1985,
Paradigm Games) is a straightforward commercial implementation of the game. No
first play to centre, and pieces may move on the long diagonals.

### Chung Toi

In [Chung Toi](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/11557/chung-toi) (Reginald
Chung, 1994, multiple publishers), each player’s pieces are octagonal, and have
a cross incised upon the top. After the placement phase, a piece can move one or
two squares (jumping is allowed) in any of the four directions that the cross is
pointing, and may also then rotate so that its cross is facing a different set
of squares.

A piece may also rotate without moving instead, as long as it changes
orientation (i.e. passing without changing the board is not permitted).

## See also

General references are: @OxfordBG [p. 116], @Bell [p. 91], and @Murray2 [p. 41].

{% gameref achi %} is often mis-described as a three-men’s-morris game (e.g. in
@TicTacToe), based on a misreading of the description in @Murray2.
