---
title: Thothit
titleLang: jav-Latn
originalTitle: <span lang="jav">ꦛꦺꦴꦛꦶꦠ꧀</span>
equipment: Playing cards (Ceki)
players: 3
subgames:
- title: Enthit
  titleLang: jav-Latn
- title: Thothit Kuna
  titleLang: jav-Latn
  players: [4, 6]
---

<span lang="jav-Latn" class="noun">Thothit</span>{%fn%}<span lang="jav-Latn"
class="noun">Ṭoṭit</span> in older orthography.{%endfn%} (<span
lang="jav">ꦛꦺꦴꦛꦶꦠ꧀</span>) is a fishing game from Java for three players,
and it is played with {% a ceki %}. The goal is to collect matching pairs of
cards, especially red-stamped ones.

<!-- excerpt -->

First, I describe the game as played in
[Surakarta](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surakarta) in the early 20th century,
based upon the description in @JavaanseKaartspelen [p. 71–2]. In Yogyakarta this
game is known as <span lang="jav-Latn" class="noun">Ceweng</span> ‘to pull
something towards oneself’, and <span lang="jav-Latn"
class="noun">Thothit</span> refers to a different, simpler, game ({% gameref thothit-yogyakarta %}).

## Setup

Use a single <span lang="jav-Latn">kepala</span> of <span
lang="jav-Latn">ceki</span> cards, which contains 60 cards and two identical
copies of each card.

Seats can be selected by choosing three pairs of cards and then dealing one of
each pair to the players and the other of each pair to the seats; the players
then sit in the matching seats. Alternatively, they can be allocated according
to social rank. In Javanese play, the highest-ranking player should sit facing the
front door of the house.

Once seats are chosen, the first player must be selected. This can be done by
dealing each player two cards; however has the highest total value — discarding
tens — is the starting player. For example if one player has the cards {%cards
'78' %}, for a total of 15, would have a value of 5; a player holding {%cards
'15'%}, for a total of 6, would beat them.

The first player is called the <span lang="jav">ꦫꦗ</span> <span
lang="jav-Latn">raja</span> ‘king’, the second (seated to their right) is called
<span lang="jav">ꦥꦠꦶꦃ</span> <span lang="jav-Latn">patih</span> ‘king’s
advisor’, and the last player (on the <span lang="jav-Latn">raja</span>’s left)
is called <span lang="jav">ꦲꦸꦚꦶꦏ꧀</span> <span
lang="jav-Latn">unyik</span> ‘last’.

The cards are shuffled and dealt out by the <span lang="jav-Latn">unyik</span>.
To each player they deal seven cards face-down and six cards face-up. The
face-down cards are the players’ hands, and the face-up cards form a pool of
eighteen cards in the middle. The remaining 21 cards are placed in a pile
face-down to form the stock.

The <span lang="jav-Latn">patih</span> takes all the face-up cards and arranges
them according to their rank.

## Play

The <span lang="jav-Latn">raja</span> begins the game, and play continues
counter-clockwise.

On each player’s turn, they first play a card from their hand to the pool. If
this matches any of the cards in the pool by rank, they capture both cards. The
pair of cards is called a <span lang="jav-Latn">gebagan</span> ‘group’. Captured
cards are placed face-down. If the played card matches no other cards in the
pool, it remains there.

All honour and {% cards '1' %} cards are considered to be of the same rank.

After playing the card from their hand, the player then turns over a card from
the stock (the ‘opened’ card, <span lang="jav-Latn">bukakan</span>), which
matches and captures in the same way. Thus, a player could capture up to four
cards on their turn.

On a player’s first turn, they may only capture an identical card (matching suit
and rank), not any others of the same rank.

Once all the cards have been played, the round is scored. For each _identical_
pair of cards they have captured, a player scores 10 points. For each identical
pair of red-stamped cards, they score 20. A red-stamped card without an
identical partner is still worth 10 points. The player with the most points is
the winner.

To determine the <span lang="jav-Latn">raja</span> for the next game, the <span
lang="jav-Latn">unyik</span> draws a card at random, and counts around the
circle to their right a number of times equal to the rank of the card. Since
there are more {% cards '1' %}-valued cards than any other, this means the <span
lang="jav-Latn">raja</span> is more likely to stay the same round-to-round than
to rotate.

## Variants

### The Chinese game

According to @JavaanseKaartspelen [p. 72], among Chinese people in Surakarta the
game was played with the following rules differences:

* Captured cards are left face-up so that other players can see them.

* If there is an identical pair on the table, as well as another card of the same
rank, the identical pair cannot be broken up before the other card is taken. If
this is done, the player who does it cannot win the round.

### Sid Sackson’s description

{% a sid-sackson %} describes the game in @CardGamesAroundTheWorld [p. 11–2].
However, he misses the second part of the player’s turn (turning a card from the
stock).

The rules are given in terms of standard playing cards: from two decks, take the
{% cards 'shdA–9' %} and {% cards 'cJQK' %}, giving 60 cards. The {% cards
'AJQK' %} cards are all considered to be {% cards '1' %} and thus match.

He gives the following rules for playing with different numbers of players: for
2 players, deal 11 cards each; for 3 to 6 players, deal 7 cards each. Always
deal 18 cards to the centre.

He also offers simplified scoring: score one point per _identical_ pair. As an
advanced rule, score 3 points for _identical_ pairs of {% cards '9' %} and 2
points for _identical_ pairs of {% cards '1' %}.

### <span lang="jav-Latn" class="noun">Enthit</span>

<span lang="jav-Latn" class="noun">Enthit</span>{%fn%}Old orthography:
<span lang="jav-Latn">Enṭit</span>.{%endfn%} is a very similar game from
Yogyakarta where the goal is to form identical quadruplets instead of
pairs.[@JavaanseKaartspelen p. 74] For this, two <span
lang="jav-Latn">kepala</span> are used, giving 120 cards.

Deal 14 cards each and 12 to the table. Play as in the description above.
Captured cards are placed face-up.

For scoring, each identical quadruplet (<span lang="jav">ꦲꦺꦤ꧀ꦛꦶꦠ꧀</span>(?)
<span lang="jav-Latn">enthit</span>) of black cards is worth 50 points. An
identical pair of black cards is worth 10 points. An identical red quadruplet
(<span lang="jav">ꦲꦺꦤ꧀ꦛꦶꦠ꧀ ꦲꦧꦁ</span> <span lang="jav-Latn">enthit abang</span>) is
worth 100 points, and a pair of identical red-stamped cards 20 points. A single
red-stamped card by itself scores 10 points.

### <span lang="jav-Latn" class="noun">Thothit Kuna</span>

<span lang="jav-Latn" class="noun">Thothit Kuna</span>{%fn%}Old orthography:
<span lang="jav-Latn">Ṭoṭit Koena</span>.{%endfn%}, or ‘ancient’ <span
lang="jav-Latn" class="noun">Thothit</span> is a form of the game previously
played at the Surakarta court.[@JavaanseKaartspelen p. 74–5] It is mostly the
same as the game described above but uses more cards and so takes longer to
play.

The game is for four or six players. One <span lang="ms">kepala</span> of cards
is needed for each player, so 240 cards for four players or 360 cards for six.

Deal ten cards face-down to each player, and ten cards face-up in front of them,
then do this again so that each player has twenty cards and there are 80 or 120
cards face-up in the centre. The remaining cards are turned down to form the stock.

The game is played in the same way as the game above, playing a card from the
hand and then one from the stock. There appear to be no restrictions on a
player’s first turn.

Once all cards are played out, each player scores. For four identical black
cards they score 10 points, for three identical 5 points. Four identical red
cards score 20 points, three 10, and an identical red pair 1 point.
