---
title: Ship, Captain, and Crew
subgames:
- title: Ship, Captain
draft: true
---

<p class="lead">Ship, Captain, and Crew is a luck-based dice game for any number of people.</p>

<!-- excerpt -->

There are a few similar games that go under the same name, but the main goal is
always to roll a Ship ({%dice 6%}), Captain ({%dice 5%}), and Crew ({%dice 4%}),
in that order.

The earliest I have found it reported is the early 1970s; however
@GamesTheyPlayInSanFrancisco [p. 58] describes it as an “old favorite”. It seems
to have originated on the West Coast of the USA.{%fn%}See previous book title,
and @TheGreatGreen [p. 121] says it is a “dice game played in West Coast
bars”.{%endfn%}

## Play

Five standard dice are required to play.

Each player has three attempts to obtain their Ship ({%dice 6%}), Captain
({%dice 5%}), and Crew ({%dice 4%}), in that order.

On their first attempt, they must roll all five dice. If they roll their next
required result, they may set it aside, but a {%dice 5%} may not be set aside
until a {%dice 6%} has been set aside, and a {%dice 4%} may not be set aside
until a {%dice 5%} has been. Dice that have been set aside will not be rolled
again.

After setting aside any dice, they then roll their second attempt with the
remaining dice, and likewise for their third attempt. 

If a player does not achieve their {%dice 654%} after three attempts, they score
zero, otherwise they score the sum of the remaining two dice (the “cargo”). If
they achieve their {%dice 654%} on the first or second attempt, they may reroll
one or both of their cargo dice for their remaining attempt(s) to try to achieve
a higher score; the new result of the dice must be kept.

Once all players have had a turn, the player with the highest score is the
winner.

## Ship, Captain

This version of the game is possibly older: a player only needs to roll their
Ship ({%dice 6%}) and Captain ({%dice 5%}); the remaining dice are all Crew, and
the sum of their numbers is the player’s
score.[@TenGamesForCruisingFamilies][@TheApresSkiBook p. 101–2]
